
Hi Ray,
    Just had a quick look at your candlesticks blog post and though you might be interested in some old Futures magazine articles on the theme that I archived (pasted below) - The articles are fairly basic , but make the point that fuzzy logic goes very well with candles.

--
Keith


The original articles might be still available on the net but I am not 
sure. 

-------------
All futures articles: 
http://www.allbusiness.com/periodicals/publication/41398-1-2.html

See index: http://www.futuresmag.com/library/archives/technology.html

Next three from: http://www.allbusiness.com/periodicals/article/730026-1.html

Artificial trader jumps candlesticks.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Sure, software is available to read candlestick charts. But here's how 
you can program your own system selecting the candlesticks and 
definitions that fit your method.

Candlestick chart analysis is subjective. You first identify the 
patterns and then judge their significance. For example, a white hammer 
pattern is bullish, but more so after a major downtrend.

Today, several vendors offer software that automatically identifies 
candlestick patterns. Some of these products also generate mechanical 
trading signals. They generally do well identifying the patterns but 
have mixed results in generating mechanical trading signals.

Let's now program our own system to identify and implement these 
signals. Using fuzzy logic we'll show you how to identify several 
candlestick patterns using TradeStation and how to integrate other forms 
of technical analysis with candlesticks to develop mechanical trading 
signals.

Clearly fuzzy Fuzzy logic is a powerful technology that allows you to 
solve problems that deal with vague concepts, such as tall or short. For 
example, if a person is six feet tall he might be considered tall 
compared to the general population, but short if he were on a 
professional basketball team. And how do you define a person who is 
5'11" if 6 feet is considered tall? Fuzzy logic allows us to solve both 
these problems.

Fuzzy logic operators are made of three parts:
1) Membership Function(s) shows how relevant data is to the premise of 
each rule;
2) Fuzzy Rule Logic performs the reasoning within fuzzy rules; and
3) Defuzzifier(s) maps the fuzzy information back into real world answers.

Here's how fuzzy logic works: Let's develop fuzzy rules that predict a 
one- year-old male child's height based on the height of his parents. 
The first step is to develop fuzzy membership functions for each 
variable's attributes. As such, we need to develop fuzzy membership 
functions for the height attributes of the mother, father and child. For 
our example, these attributes are tall, normal and short. We have 
defined generic membership functions for these height attributes as follows:

Tall=maximum(0,min(1,(X-Average Height)/(Stdev of height)))

Short=maximum(0,min(1,(Average Height-X)/(Stdev of height)))

Normal=Maximum(0,(1-(abs(X-Average Height)/(Stdev of height))))

When using these membership functions, substitute the following values 
for average height and standard deviation for the mother, father and child.

Mother average height 65 inches, stdev 3 inches

Father average height 69 inches, stdev 4 inches

Child average height (12 months) 30 inches, stdev 2 inches

Now we can now develop our fuzzy rules. Suppose we have these two fuzzy 
rules in our expert system:

* If Mother Short and Father Short then Child Short.

* If Mother Short and Father Normal then Child Normal.

We also have the following facts:

* Mother is 63 inches tall

* Father is 67 inches tall.

Using the above facts and our fuzzy membership functions for both the 
mother and father, we calculated the following output values for each 
membership function:

* Mother's height short .66, normal .33 tall 0

* Father's height short .5, normal .5 tall 0

Let's see what happens when we run these facts and fuzzy rules.

* If Mother Short (.66) and Father Short (.5) then Child Short (.5).

* If Mother Short (.66) and Father Normal (.5) then Child Normal (.5)

Using the rules of fuzzy logic, you take the minimum of the values 
associated with the conditions when they are joined by an "and." If they 
are joined by an "or," you take the maximum.

As you can see, the child is both short and normal. We will now use 
something called defuzzification to convert the results of these rules 
back to a real height. First, find the center point of each of the 
membership functions that apply to the height of the child. In our case 
that is 28 for short, 30 for normal and 32 for tall. Next, multiply the 
output from the rules associated with each membership function by these 
center point values. Divide this by the sum of the outputs from the 
membership functions. This will convert the fuzzy output back into a 
real height for our one-year-old male child.

(.5*28+.5*30+0*32)/(.5+.5) = 29 inches tall.

To see how these membership functions interact for the height of our 
one- year-old child, see the diagram, "Watching my boy grow," above.

Lighting candles To analyze candlestick charts using fuzzy logic, the 
first step is to list the variables involved and then develop a list of 
attributes for each variable. For a single candlestick, they are:

Color

* White or Black

Shape

* Long, Small or About Equal

* Upper ShadowSize

* Long, Small, About None

* LowerShadowSize

* Long, Small, About None.

Not all variables require fuzzy logic. In our list, "color" does not 
because it is simply the sign of the close minus the open.

Now we'll develop a membership function for each of these variables. For 
a graphical look at the "shape" candlestick variable, see "Measuring 
stick," above.

After developing a graphical representation for each variable and 
membership function, we program them (see "Fuzzy logic makes it clear").

Identifying candlestick patterns is only half the problem. The 
predictive value of a given candlestick pattern is based on the context 
in which it occurred. For example, a hammer is much more valuable after 
a long downtrend. Doji are reversal patterns that are more valuable 
after long uptrends and are not as good at picking bottoms.

Next let's develop a candlestick trader using the doji pattern. The key 
to using candlesticks is to filter your signals. A good way to think 
about using candlestick reversal patterns is they supply more exact 
timing for an event that other indicators have already warned you about.

Using our overbought indicator and our fuzzy function to detect simple 
dojis produced 70% winners and a win/loss ratio of over 2:1.

Using fuzzy logic to develop mechanical ways for analyzing subjective 
forms of analysis like candlesticks should be one of the most important 
areas of research in technical analysis for years to come.

Murray A. Ruggiero Jr. is a consultant in East Haven, Conn. His firm, 
Ruggiero Associates, specializes in market timing systems using advanced 
technologies as well as Excel and Microsoft Windows development. 
CompuServe I.D.: 71054,3545.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Fuzzy logic makes it clear.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's see how to design your own candlestick recognition software.

We'll begin by designing a fuzzy logic candlestick recognition utility. 
First, we need to define the needed membership functions, which is done 
in the main story. Next, graph these on paper. Then develop formulas 
and/or rules that represent these functions. For the shape set (defined 
in the main text) of membership functions we have three functions: long, 
small and doji.

Now take a look at the fuzzy membership function for a long shaped 
candlestick. (Comments are in boldfaced type and in brackets.) The 
TradeStation code for this function is:

{Fuzzy Logic to define a long candlestick}

Inputs:

OPrice(NUMERICSERIES),CPrice(NUMERICSERIES),LBack(NUMERIC), 
OneCof(NUMERIC),ZeroCof(NUMERIC);

Variables:

PrevLong(0),CRange(0),AveRange(0),Z

Trig(0),OneTrig(0),Tall(0),Scale(0);

{Calculate the size of the body}

CRange=absvalue(OPrice-CPrice);

{Calculate the Zero and One Trigger}

ZTrig=Average(CRange,LBack)*ZeroCof; OneTrig=Average(CRange,LBack)*One Cof;

{Calculate the Scale}

Scale=OneTrig-ZTrig;

{If Scale is zero then set to 99.99 since FuzzyLong should output a 0}

if Scale=0 then Scale=99.99;

{Calculate value of tall so it can be used in fuzzy long}

Tall=maxlist(0,minlist(1,(CRange-OneTrig)/(Scale)));

{If the previous candle is tall then relax requirement for tall so that 
we don't get ridiculous requirements for consecutive tall candles. Only 
that they must be bigger than previous candle to output a 1}

if Tall[1]=1 then 
Tall=maxlist(0,minlist(1,(CRange-CRange[1])/(CRange[1]- ZTrig))); 
FuzzyLong=Tall;

The fuzzy long membership function is similar to our tall height 
function from our child height example except for the rule involving 
consecutive tall candles. Without this rule it is possible a second tall 
candle would not be identified even if it was taller than the first.

Here are the definitions for a simple set of membership functions 
developed for TradeStation that can be used to identify most of the 
common candlestick patterns.

Candlestick color

* CandleColor(Open,Close)

Candlestick shape

* FuzzyLong(Open,Close,Lookback, OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger)

* FuzzySmall(Open,Close,Lookback, OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger)

* FuzzyDoji(Open,Close,Lookback, OneTrigger, ZeroTrigger)

Candlestick shadows: Upper and lower

* FuzzyLongShad(Open,high,low,close, OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger,UpperShadow)

* FuzzyShortShad(Open,high,low,close, OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger,UpperShadow)

* FuzzyNoShad(Open,High,Low,Close, OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger,UpperShadow) 
Miscellaneous functions

* FuzzyMiddle(Open,Close,RefPrice, Lookback,OneTrigger,ZeroTrigger)

* EnGulfing(Open,Close,RefBar)

To use these functions, start with the CandleColor function, which 
simply returns a 1 if the candlestick is white and a -1 if it is black.

The candlestick shape set of membership functions uses the following 
inputs: open and close, which are the open and close of that 
candlestick. Next we have lookback, which is the period used for a 
moving average of the candlestick body size used as a measure of 
relative candlestick size, The OneTrigger and ZeroTrigger are 
coefficients used to calculate the one and zero points for the 
membership function. These coefficients are applied to the average 
candlestick body size.

The candlestick upper and lower shadow functions use these arguments: 
First the open, high, low and close of the session; Next, the OneTrigger 
and ZeroTrigger values similar to that used in the body membership 
functions; and last, which shadow to apply the function to 1 for upper 
and 0 for lower.

The fuzzy middle function is used to output the membership of some point 
on the current bar being in the middle of the previous candlestick's body.

The engulfing function outputs a 1 if the current bar engulfs a bar 
pointed to by RefBar back and a 0 otherwise.

The values for the lookback and triggers are developed using trial and 
error. The goal is to best agree with a human expert's classification of 
these candlestick attributes.

Now we'll use the FuzzyLong function along with other candlestick 
recognition functions discussed earlier to identify a simple hammer 
candlestick pattern. Let's take a look at this code in TradeStation.

{Checks to see if the bar is a hammer. Body must not be long, upper 
shadow must be short, lower shadow must be long}

Inputs:

OPrice(NumericSeries),HPrice(Numeric 
Series),LPrice(NumericSeries),CPrice (NumericSeries);Vars:Body(0),Up- 
Shad(O),LShad(0);

{Calculate membership to class not long}

Body=1-FuzzyLong (OPrice,CPrice, 5,2,1);

{Calculate membership to class small upper shadow}

UpShad=FuzzySmallShad(OPrice, HPrice,LPrice,CPrice,.10,.25,1);

{Calculate membership to class long lower shadow}

LShad=FuzzyLongShad(OPrice,HPrice, LPrice,CPrice,2,1,0);

{Using the rules of fuzzy logic "AND" these together by taking the min}

IsHammer=minlist(Body,UpShad,LShad);

For a candlestick to be a hammer, the body cannot be long and must have 
a long lower shadow and small upper shadow. We defined long as two times 
the average bar height over the past 15 periods. A good way to test the 
user functions you develop is to use them inside a TradeStation 
indicator and compare the classification to that of a human expert.

The TradeStation functions we developed also can classify candlesticks 
such as tall white or black candles or more complex candles such as 
bearish and bullish engulfing patterns.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Lighting candlesticks with fuzzy logic.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Programming software to recognize candlestick patterns can save time and 
money. Here's how to do it with more complex patterns using fuzzy logic 
to ease the recognition process.

A single candlestick has these characteristics: color, shape, upper and 
lower shadow size. But not all characteristics require fuzzy logic. For 
example, "color" doesn't because it is simply the sign of the close 
minus the open.

The other attributes aren't so specific. For example, size requires 
fuzzy logic because a candle's size is relative to nearly all other 
candles. Also, if a candle with the size of 2 is large, a candle with a 
size of 1.9 is nearly large, not small. Here's an example of a fuzzy 
logic function (improved from the version in the February 1995 issue) that
identifies a candle with a long shape:

Inputs: OPrice(NUMERICSERIES), 
CPrice(NUMERICSERIES),LBack(NUMERIC),OneCof(NUMERIC),ZeroCof (NUMERIC);
Vars: PrevLong(0),CRange(0),Ave Range(0), ZTrig(0), OneTrig(0), Tall(0), 
Scale(0);
{Calculate the range for the candle}
CRange = absvalue(OPrice-CPrice);
{Calculate what level represents a 0}
ZTrig = Average[(CRange, LBack).sup.*] ZeroCof;
{Calculate what level represents a 1}
OneTrig = Average[(CRange, LBack).sup.*] OneCof;
{Calculate the difference between the zero and one level}
Scale = OneTrig-ZTrig;
{If one level and zero level are the same set to 99.99 so it can't be a 
large bar}
if Scale = 0 then Scale = 99.99;
{Calculate the fuzzy membership to tall}
Tall = maxlist(0, minlist(1, (CRange-OneTrig)/(Scale)));
{If previous bar is big relax requirements}
if Tall[1] = 1 and CRange[1]-ZTrig < > 0 then Tall = 
maxlist(0,min-list(1, (CRange-CRange[1])/(CRange[1]-ZTrig)));
FuzzyLong = Tall;

This function will return a 1 when the current candle size is greater 
than or equal to OneCof times the average candle size over the last 
lookback days. It will return a 0 when it is less than ZeroCof times the 
average size. When the candle size is between these ranges it returns a 
scaled value between 0 and 1.

This function also can handle the case when the previous candle was very 
long and the next candle also should be long, but using the general rule 
based on the average size, the candle would not have been identified 
correctly. It also handles divide-by-zero conditions that occur when the 
open and close are the same.

To identify most of the common candlestick patterns we need functions 
that can classify all of the attributes associated with a candlestick. 
The shape of a candlestick can be long, small, doji. The upper and lower 
wick can be large, small, none. You also must be able to identify if 
there are gaps or if one candle engulfs another. After developing 
functions to identify these attributes you can identify more complex 
patterns.

Step by step

The first step in developing a candlestick recognition tool is to decide 
what patterns you want to identify. Here we'll target some of the more 
popular patterns: dark cloud cover, bullish engulfing pattern and 
evening star. Next, we need to develop a profile of each of these 
patterns (see "In the library").

The dark cloud cover consists of two candlesticks. The first is a white 
candle with a significant body, and the second is a black candle that 
opens above the high of the white candle but closes below the midpoint 
of it. This is a bearish pattern in an uptrend.

The bullish engulfing pattern also consists of two candlesticks. The 
first is a black candle, and the second is a white candle that engulfs 
the first candle. This is a bullish sign in a downtrend.

Our final pattern, evening star, consists of three candles. The first is 
a significant white candle. Next, is a small candle of either color, and 
the third is a black candle. The middle candle gaps above both the white 
and black candles. The black candle opens higher than the close of the 
white but then closes below the midpoint of the white candle. This is a 
bearish pattern in a uptrend.

To translate these explanations into TradeStation Easy Language code see 
"Inside every dark cloud is fuzzy logic" (left). You can repeat this 
process to identify any candlestick patterns. Once you've written your 
code, test it. We tested our code (and our routines) using the plates 
from Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques by Steve Nison. If you are 
not identifying the patterns you want, adjust the lookback period as 
well as the scaling coefficients. In general, mechanical identification 
will miss some patterns that can be detected by eye. Once you've 
developed routines to identify your candlestick patterns, use them to 
develop or improve various trading systems.

To develop mechanical trading strategies we'll begin with the dark cloud 
cover pattern on COMEX gold during the period Aug. 1, 1986 to Dec. 26, 
1995. We'll go short on the next open when we identify a dark cloud 
cover pattern and have a 10-day RSI greater than 50. Then we'll exit at 
a five-day high. The code for this system in EasyLanguage is:

Vars: DC(0); DC = DarkCloud(15,1,1); If DC [greater than] .5 and 
RSI(close, 10) [greater than] 50 then sell at open; exitshort at 
highest(high,5) stop;

The results, without slippage and commissions, are:

Net profit         $150.00
Trades               13
Wins                  4
Losses                9
Win %                31%
Average trade       $11.54

These are pretty bad, especially because they don't even cover 
commissions and slippage. But by combining correlation analysis between 
the CRB and gold we can improve this performance.

Last month's article covered how gold normally only trends when it is 
highly correlated to the CRB. Using this, we'll develop two different 
exit rules for our dark cloud combined with a 10-day RSI pattern. We'll 
exit using a five- day high when the 50-day correlation between gold and 
the CRB is above .50. We'll use a limit order at the entry price -2 x 
average(range, 10) when the correlation is below .50. The theory is we 
use a trend-type exit when the market has a good probability of trending 
and a limit order when the market has a low probability of trending. The 
code we'll use is (Note: We are once again using RACorrel that we 
discussed last month.):

Vars: DC(0),Correl(0),CRB(0),GC(0); CRB = Close of Data2; GC = Close; 
Correl = RACorreI(CRB,GC,50); DC = DarkCloud(15,1,1); If DC [greater 
than] .5 and RSI(close, 10) [greater than] 50 then sell at open; If 
Correl [greater than] .5 then exitshort at highest(high,5) stop; If 
Correl [less than] .5 then exitshort at entryprice-[2.sup.*] 
average(range, 10) limit;

The results of these new rules once again without slippage and 
commissions during the same period used earlier are:

Net profit          $5,350.00
Trades                  12
Wins                     9
Losses                   3
Win %                   75%
Average trade         $445.83

This is a great improvement in the performance of the dark cloud simply 
by using intermarket analysis to select an exit method. But there aren't 
enough trades to prove this is a reliable trading method for gold. It 
only is used as an example of how to use candlestick patterns to develop 
mechanical trading systems.

Combining candlesticks with other Western methods and intermarket 
analysis is a hot area of research for developing mechanical trading 
systems. The ability to backtest candlestick patterns will help answer 
how well any given candlestick pattern works in a given market. If you 
evaluate these patterns objectively, at least you'll know how well they 
worked in the past and how much heat you will take trading them in the 
future.

RELATED ARTICLE: Inside every dark cloud is fuzzy logic

Here's how to use fuzzy logic and EasyLanguage to identify our 
candlestick patterns. The primitive functions, discussed in my previous 
article, used to identify the dark cloud, bullish engulf and evening 
star are:

CandleStick Color: CandleColor(Open,Close) CandleStick Shape: 
FuzzyLong(Open,Close,Lookback,OneTrigger, ZeroTrigger) 
FuzzySmall(Open,Close,Lookback,OneTrigger, ZeroTrigger)

Miscellaneous Functions: EnGulfing(Open,Close, RefBar) 
WindowDown(Open,High,Low,Close,Lookback) 
WindowUp(Open,High,Low,Close,Lookback)

These functions' parameters are:

1) The LookBack is the period used to calculate a moving average of the 
body size of each candlestick. This average is used as a reference point 
to compare the current candle's size relative to recent candles.

2) The OneTrigger is the percentage of the average candle size that will 
cause the function to output a 1.

3) The ZeroTrigger is the percentage of the average candle size for 
outputting a 0.

4) The RefBar parameter is used by the engulfing function to reference 
which candlestick the current candlestick needs to engulf.

Also important when using these functions is that the OneTrigger is 
smaller than the ZeroTrigger for functions that identify small or doji 
candies. When using the long candle size function the OneTrigger is 
larger than the ZeroTrigger.

The engulfing function returns a 1 if the current candle engulfs the 
"RefBar" candle. The window up and window down functions return a number 
greater than 0 when there is a gap in the proper direction. The exact 
return value from these functions is based on the size of the gap 
relative to the average candle size over the past lookback days.

Combining these functions, we can identify the candlestick formations:

The dark cloud is a bearish formation and usually signals a top in the 
market or at least an end of a trend and a period of consolidation. The 
EasyLanguage code is:

Inputs: LookBack(Numeric),OneCoe(Numeric),ZeroCoe(Numeric); Vars: 
Color(0),SBody(0); Vars: FuzzyRange(0),Return(0); Color = 
CandleColor(O,C); {FuzzySmall has the following arguments: 
FuzzySmall(LookBack,OneCoe,ZeroCoe)} {We reversed OneCoe and ZeroCoe so 
we can test for not as small as input to the fuzzy small function.}

SBody = FuzzySmall(O,C,LookBack,[ZeroCoe.sup.*]. 3,[OneCoe.sup.*]1); 
Return = 0; FuzzyRange = Close-(Open[1] + Close[1])/2; if Color = -1 and 
Color[1] = 1 and open [greater than] High[1] and FuzzyRange [less than] 
0 then begin Return = 1 - SBody[1]; end; DarkCloud = Return;

First, we save the color of each candlestick. Next, we save the 
membership of each candlestick to the fuzzy set small. We inverted the 
OneCoe and ZeroCoe arguments because the dark cloud requires the first 
white candle have a significant body. We did this by inverting the small 
membership function. If we used the long membership function we would 
have missed many dark clouds because the first candle was significant 
but not quite long.

Next, we calculate if the second candlestick is black and falls below 
the mid- point of the first candle that is white. The second candle must 
also open above the high of the first. If the candle qualifies as a dark 
cloud we return the fuzzy inverse membership of the first candle to the 
class small as the value of the fuzzy dark cloud.

The EasyLanguage code for bullish engulfing pattern is:

Inputs: LookBack(Numeric),OneCoeNumeric),ZeroCoe(Numeric); Vars: 
Color(0),SBody(0),LBody(0); Color = CandleColor(O,C); SBody = 
FuzzySmall(O,C,LookBack,[OneCoe.sup.*].3,[ZeroCoe.sup.*]1); LBody = 
FuzzyLong(O,C,LookBack,[OneCoe.sup.*]2,[ZeroCoe.sup.*]1); if 
EnGulfing(O,C,1) = 1 and Color = 1 and Color[1] = -1 then BullEngulf = 
minlist(SBody[1],LBody) else BullEngulf = 0;

In identifying a bullish engulf, we first evaluate the color and size of 
each candle. If the current candle is white and engulfs the first candle 
that is black we have a possible bullish engulf. Its significance is 
measured by using our fuzzy logic functions for candle size. We take a 
fuzzy "AND" between the membership of the previous candle to the small 
class and the current to the large class. This value measures the 
importance of the engulfing pattern. If the pattern does not qualify as 
a bullish engulfing pattern we return a 0.

Our Easy Language code for evening star is:

Inputs: LookBack(Numeric),OneCoe(Numeric),ZeroCoe(Numeric); Vars: 
Color(0),SBody(0); Vars: FuzzyRange(0),Return(0); Color = 
CandleColor(O,C); SBody = 
FuzzySmall(O,C,LookBack,[OneCoe.sup.*].3,[ZeroCoe.sub.*]1); Return = 0; 
FuzzyRange = Close-(Close[2] + Open[2])/2; if Color = -1 and Color[2] = 
1 and WindowUp(O,H,L,C,1)[1] [greater than] 0 and open [greater than] 
open[1] and FuzzyRange [less than] 0 then begin Return = 
minList(SBody[1], 1-SBody[2]); end; EveningStar = Return;

First we test the color of each candle as well as its membership to 
small size class. Next we test to see where the close of the current 
candle falls in the range of the first candle in the formation.

For an evening star we need a black current candle and a white candle 
two candlesticks ago. Next, we need the second candle in the formation 
to have gapped higher. Finally, the current candle must open higher than 
the middle candle but close at or below the middle of the first candle. 
All of these requirements must be met for the formation to qualify as an 
evening star. We then return the fuzzy "AND" of one candle ago to the 
small class and two candles ago to the inverse of the small class. If 
the formation does not qualify as an evening star, the function returns a 0.

RELATED ARTICLE: Fuzzy logic explained

Fuzzy logic is a powerful technology used to solve problems that deal 
with vague concepts such as tall or short. For example, if a person is 6 
feet tall, he might be considered tall compared to the general 
population, but short if he was on a basketball team. Another issue is 
what do you consider a person who is 5 feet 11 inches if 6 feet is 
considered tall. Fuzzy logic allows us to solve both of these problems.

Fuzzy logic operators are made of three pans: membership function(s), 
fuzzy rule logic and defuzzifier(s). The membership function shows how 
relevant data is to the premise of each role. Fuzzy rule logic performs 
the reasoning within fuzzy rules. The defuzzifier maps the fuzzy 
information back into real world answers.

Fuzzy logic also has fuzzy conjunctive operators. These are fuzzy "AND" 
and fuzzy "OR". A fuzzy "AND" is the minimum of the two fuzzy 
conditions. The fuzzy "OR" is the maximum of the two conditions.

RELATED ARTICLE: In the library

"Learning Japanese-Style 'Candlesticks' Charting," Steve Nison, December 
1989

"A Japanese Candelabra Of Price Chart Patterns," Steve Nison, April 1990

"Candlestick Patterns: How Reliable Are They?." Larry Williams, June 1991

"Presenting Another Chapter In Candlestick Analysis," Steve Nison, May 1992

"Candlesticks Work Best With Overhead Light," Steve Nison, September 1994

"The Yin And Yang Of Trading," Steve Nison, November 1994

"Making A Break For Profits," Steve Nison, December 1994

"Past Meets Present," Gary Wagner and Brad Matheny, July 1995

Murray A. Ruggiero Jr. is a consultant in East Haven, Conn. His firm, 
Ruggiero Associates, specializes in market timing systems using advanced 
technologies as well as TradeStation application programming. CompuServe 
I.D.: 71054,3545.


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Finding candlesticks inside the E-mini S&P:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
candlestick charting can be complex, turning traders away from using it 
at all, but there are advantages to being familiar with at least a few 
continuation and reversal patterns--and it doesn't have to get too 
complicated.

The candlestick techniques traders are familiar with today originated as 
a technical charting method used by the Japanese more than 100 years 
before the development of the price bar or point-and-figure techniques.

According to Shaun Taylor, president of Phase II Consultants Inc., a 
1700s era Japanese trader in the futures markets of the day, Munehisa 
Homma, discovered that aside from the strong link between price and the 
supply and demand of rice, the markets also were strongly influenced by 
the emotions of the traders.

Homma saw that when emotions played into the equation a vast difference 
between the value and the price of rice occurred. This difference 
applies to today's markets as it did to rice in Japan long ago. The 
principles Homma established ate the basis for the candlestick charting 
method.

Despite its many patterns and rules, which at times can be involved and 
difficult, candlestick charting is popular among traders.

CANDLE VS. BAR

Candlesticks portray price information like the high, low, close and 
open of that day, as do bars on a typical bar chart, but many traders 
find candlesticks easier and faster to read.

"Many traders look to bar charts for reversal formations such as double 
tops and head-and-shoulders, yet candlesticks can be used for the same 
purpose," says Erik Gebhard, president of Altavest Worldwide Trading 
Inc. "In either case, a reversal does not always signify the current 
uptrend/downtrend will reverse direction. It may merely suggest that the 
current trend may end and the market may then decide in drift sideways."

There is too much in candlesticks to fit into one article, or perhaps 
even one book, so we are going to focus on a few main patterns.

"It is important to remember that candle patterns are merely reactions 
of traders at a particular time in the market place," says Taylor. "That 
human beings often react en masse to situations allows candlestick chart 
analysis to work."

WHAT MAKES A CANDLE?

A candlestick is made up of a thin vertical line with a body that may be 
empty (white) or green on days when the close was higher than the open, 
of filled-in black of red on days the close is lower than the open (see 
"Candlestick construction," page 60).

The body, called the real body, represents the range between opening and 
closing prices. Vertical lines above and below the real body are called 
shadows. Shadows indicate high and low prices for that candle. Shadows 
(or "wicks") can be long or short. If the upper shadow on the filled-in 
body is short, it indicates the open that day was closer to the high of 
the day. A short upper shadow on a white or unfilled body indicates the 
close was near the high.

INTERPRETING CANDLESTICKS

Being able to interpret candlesticks makes it easier for a trader to get 
a feel for day-to-day sentiment. A candlestick with a long black (of red 
in some applications) body represents a bearish period. A long white 
body (or green in some applications) represent a bullish period.

Spinning tops, small bodies of either color, show a tight trading range 
between the open and the close and are considered to be neutral in terms 
of market direction; they represent equilibrium between bulls and bears 
when they appear in a sideways choppy market. The shadows can be any 
size in spinning tops. Doji lines almost have no real body with a 
horizontal line representing both the open and close.

REVERSAL PATTERNS

A candlestick pattern may consist o one candlestick or a series of 
candlesticks forming over several trading sessions. A reversal candle 
pattern is a series of candlesticks that show a trend reversal--this is 
not easy to spot.

"Candlestick reversal patterns have more relevance if viewed within the 
context of prior activity to be effective," Gebhard says. "In fact, 
identical candlesticks may have different meanings depending on where 
they occur within the context of prior trends and formation."

There are at Least 40 patterns in candlesticks that can indicate 
reversals. We will focus on two one-day reversals, the hammer and the 
hanging man.

A hammer is an umbrella that appears after a price decline, and comes 
from the action of "hammering" out a bottom. The shadow should be at 
least twice as long as the body, which can be either black or white. A 
hammer occurs in the context of a downtrend--when the price opens down 
and then drops throughout the session only to come back near the opening 
price at close.

"Hammers are excellent signals of a market that is bottoming," says 
Steve Nison, founder and president of Candlecharts.com.

A hanging man resembles a hammer because it is also an umbrella of 
either color with a shadow that is twice as long; however, it develops 
after a rally in the context of an uptrend (see "Hammer vs. Hanging 
man," below).

"Engulfing patterns are the most recognizable in candlestick charting 
for most traders," Nison says. A bearish engulfing pattern is recognized 
as a long black real body engulfing a small white real body and develops 
in an uptrend when the sellers out number the buyers.

It indicates the open was higher than the previous day and that the 
session sold off with volume much greater than the previous session. A 
bullish engulfing pattern takes place when buyers outpace the sellers. 
This condition is reflected by a long white real body engulfing a small 
black real body.

CONTINUATION PATTERNS

Side-by-side lines can indicate when the current trend will continue 
going in the direction it's in. Side-by-side white lines ate an 
indication that the bullish trend will continue. In this pattern, the 
first day is a white day, the second day is a white day that gaps up and 
the third day is a white day of about the same body length and close as 
the second day. In an uptrend three white days occur with an upward gap 
between the first two and a similar body length and close for the last 
two. This suggests a definite building of the uptrend and has a high 
reliability.

Side-by-side bearish white lines are identified when the first day is a 
black day, the second day is a white day that gaps down and the third 
day is a white day of about the same body length and close as the second 
day. In a downtrend a black day is followed by two white days gapped 
below the first day. This typically means the shorts are covering their 
positions and that no reversal is about to occur, although the bearish 
version is not as reliable as the bullish side-by-side. The downtrend 
should remain intact.

When three long white days occur with consecutively higher closes and 
the fourth day opens higher and closes below the open of the first day, 
it is called a bullish three-line strike. The black day drives prices 
back to where they were at the start of the pattern. If the bullish 
trend was strong before the pattern, then it should continue.

In a bearish three-line strike three long black days occur with 
consecutively lower closes and the fourth day opens lower, but closes 
above the open of the first day. The white day drives prices back to 
where they were at the pattern's start. If the bearish trend was strong 
before the pattern, then it should continue.

The more comfortable you get with these patterns, the easier it will be 
for you to recognize them instantly and to use them on a regular basis.

Hammer vs. Hanging man

Hammer and hanging men may look the same, but a hammer must occur within 
the context of a downtrend to be considered a hammer and a hanging man 
must occur in the context of a downtrend The following charts are from 
the E-mini S&P 500.

The first chart shows that on Oct. 27 right after noon a hammer (notice 
there is no top shadow and the bottom shadow is twice as long as the 
body) appeared when the trend was what could be seen as a downtrend. 
Afterwards the trend moved above our 21-day moving average (blue line). 
This chart, for illustrative purposes, also shows an engulfing pattern 
right before 9:00 am. The body of the red candle engulfs the entire body 
of the previous green candle and confirms the trend is changing 
downward. An example of a spinning top is also shown

The second chart shows that on Nov. 13 early in the morning a hanging 
man appears. It's a hanging man because the previous three days are all 
up days, thereby confirming the uptrend to qualify this as a hanging man 
and not a hammer. The trend did afterwards briefly turn downward. This 
chart, for illustrative purposes, also shows a few Doji's, which were 
not covered in this article because Doji patterns alone are very 
complicated to even begin to introduce them, but you should know what 
they are (see "Learning Japanese style 'candlesticks' charting," Futures 
1989).


-- 
Scanned for viruses and dangerous content at 
http://www.oneunified.net and is believed to be clean.

